---
title: Free/Fair? Or, A Somewhat Bizarre Request to Fellow Harvard Alums
date: 2016-01-24
permalink: /posts/2016/01/free-fair-harvard
tags: 
   - academia
   - atleasttheyreelected
   - boardofoverseers
   - diversity
   - harvard
   - meritocracy
   - rant
   - scarequotes
---

Hey, fellow Harvard alums: This year, when you get a ballot for the Harvard Board of Overseers Election in&nbsp;the snail-mail, instead of throwing it away without looking at it: don't.&nbsp;Instead: vote.

The Board of Overseers is a group of 30 individuals each serving 8-year terms.<a href="http://www.harvard.edu/about-harvard/harvards-president-leadership">&nbsp;Harvard says:</a>
<blockquote>Drawing on the&nbsp;wide-ranging experience and expertise of its members, the Board exerts broad&nbsp;influence over the University's strategic directions, provides counsel to the&nbsp;University leadership on priorities and plans, and has the power of consent to&nbsp;certain actions of the Corporation.</blockquote>
The "Corporation" is the president and&nbsp;fellows, who approve the university budget, major capital projects, endowment&nbsp;spending and tuition charges, etc. The board is elected by anyone with a&nbsp;Harvard degree who actually votes on those ballots they send to us every year&nbsp;that we then throw out.

This year, there is a slate of 5 individuals running on a platform they've&nbsp;dubbed&nbsp;"<a href="http://www.unzcloud.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/01/Harvard-Platform.pdf">Free</a>&nbsp;<a href="http://www.unzcloud.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/01/Harvard-Platform.pdf">Harvard, Fair Harvard.</a>" It's confusing for approximately 155 reasons, not the least of which being that it&nbsp;includes Ralph Nader. On&nbsp;face, <a href="http://infoproc.blogspot.com/2016/01/free-harvard-fair-harvard.html">they argue for the following:</a>
<ol>
	<li>Increased use of endowment income to make Harvard more accessible</li>
	<li>More transparency in Harvard admissions</li>
</ol>
<em>Plank 1:</em>&nbsp;they want to eliminate tuition. &nbsp;This is the major point of coverage in the popular media. &nbsp;The argument is: (A) Harvard&nbsp;can afford it, (B) doing so would increase access and applicant diversity,&nbsp;because students from under-represented socio-economic groups would be more likely to apply, and (C) eliminating tuition would have wide-reaching&nbsp;social effects by spreading to other institutions.

(A) is mostly false. <em>Endowments aren't liquid</em>. The endowment is not a checking account, and the size of the endowment/return is&nbsp;<a href="http://www.marketplace.org/2016/01/15/world/why-its-hard-raid-university-endowment">not indicative of the amount of money available</a> for tuition support. (I acknowledge the lack of objectivity on the part of the University spokesperson, but it's still true.) Yes, the University&nbsp;should restructure the endowment to free up more money for tuition&nbsp;support and outright reduce tuition, and elicit&nbsp;donations just for this purpose. But: that's not the same as using endowment&nbsp;returns to make Harvard&nbsp;free, overnight.

(B) is almost certainly true.

(C) is unlikely.&nbsp;The potential impact is limited to schools with sufficient resources to do&nbsp;the same, of which there are&nbsp;<a href="http://www.usnews.com/education/best-colleges/the-short-list-college/articles/2015/10/06/10-universities-with-the-largest-endowments">only a handful.</a>&nbsp;Offhand (based on no&nbsp;information) just lowering tuition might have more impact, because it's more realistic&nbsp;for other schools to follow while still being&nbsp;a legitimate kick to&nbsp;the system (fun fact: scholarship dollars spent&nbsp;is a factor in USN&amp;W's algorithms, so raising tuition and scholarships simultaneously&nbsp;is <a href="http://www.lsac.org/docs/default-source/research-(lsac-resources)/gr-07-02.pdf">good for rankings</a>).

Increasing access and encouraging the underrepresented to&nbsp;apply are awesome goals. Current stated tuition is&nbsp;obscene. It was obscene when I attended, and&nbsp;<a href="https://college.harvard.edu/financial-aid/how-aid-works/cost-attendance">it's worse now</a>.

That said: Why on Earth <em>should</em> Harvard be free for everyone? It's often&nbsp;reasonable to exchange money&nbsp;for services.&nbsp;&nbsp;<a href="http://features.thecrimson.com/2015/freshman-survey/makeup/">More than 30% of the class of 2019 comes from families making more than $250k a year</a>. &nbsp;Even though&nbsp;the financial aid office certainly makes strange need calculations at the&nbsp;boundaries, I'm willing to bet that many&nbsp;students supported&nbsp;by families making &gt;= $250k/year can afford to pay <em>some</em>&nbsp;amount of money for their Harvard educations.

On the one hand, this is a chicken/egg problem: if there were greater&nbsp;access, less of the Freshman class would be so wealthy. On the other&nbsp;hand, it's total overkill: It makes a Harvard education free for people&nbsp;who don't need it to be, to solve what is effectively a&nbsp;marketing problem. Instead, Harvard could spend that money on reducing tuition&nbsp;overall, performing aggressive outreach, and ensuring that students from underserved populations are able to take full, effective advantage of their Harvard educations.

<em>Plank 2:</em> is more complicated: "more transparency in&nbsp;admissions."

(I've found it difficult to write about this in&nbsp;a brief or linear fashion, so I'm trying to scope my remarks, with sadly limited success.)

First, note that comments from the slate tie this plank into a&nbsp;call to end legacy preferences (this is apparently Nader's concern,&nbsp;though I can only find <a href="http://www.thecollegefix.com/post/25863/">second-hand quotes from him</a>&nbsp;on it), which would be awesome. &nbsp;Legacy&nbsp;is ridiculous, a fact that is so obviously true I won't&nbsp;bother citing it. However, based on no information, it's not clear to me how Harvard can both&nbsp;maintain the alumni giving network that sustains the endowment without&nbsp;an implicit/explicit understanding about legacy. &nbsp;This sounds awesome on paper but is probably&nbsp;impossible and not the&nbsp;real point anyway.

Back to that real&nbsp;point: At a high level, "more transparency in admissions" is&nbsp;related to evidence that Harvard and other elite schools discriminate against&nbsp;Asian and Asian American candidates. Unz says this outright, and his&nbsp;<a href="http://www.unz.com/runz/will-harvard-become-free-and-fair/)">language</a>&nbsp;exactly matches that of the plaintiffs in an<a href="http://www.thecrimson.com/article/2014/4/24/race-admissions-lawsuit-website/"> ongoing&nbsp;lawsuit against the university</a> demanding admissions transparency&nbsp;and&nbsp;asserting discrimination against Asian&nbsp;applicants.&nbsp;&nbsp;Various members of the slate are involved in some way in that lawsuit. &nbsp;This is a legitimate concern, or at least the evidence that substantiates it&nbsp;is pretty&nbsp;compelling (Unz's link to the Economist summarizing the claim&nbsp;is broken, but you can find some summary data on his Free and Fair blog&nbsp;post).

Indeed, if discrimination were the <em>only</em>&nbsp;concern, I wouldn't be so alarmed. But the evidence suggests that it's&nbsp;not the only issue&nbsp;at stake. Additional fuel&nbsp;for this suspicion comes a bit sideways, but consider the way the&nbsp;campaign tries to explain the combination of planks via<a href="http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/15/us/a-push-to-make-harvard-free-also-questions-the-role-of-race-in-admissions.html">&nbsp;the</a>&nbsp;<a href="http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/15/us/a-push-to-make-harvard-free-also-questions-the-role-of-race-in-admissions.html">NYTimes:</a>
<blockquote>If Harvard omits tuition fees, more highly qualified students from all strata&nbsp;of the society will find opportunity to apply. Similarly, the university&nbsp;authority will find ease in balancing classes for racial or ethnic diversity and&nbsp;the Asian- Americans won't lose out.</blockquote>
Uh...what? The conclusion&nbsp;only follows if Harvard&nbsp;were discriminating against Asian applicants because of a lack of&nbsp;socio-economically diverse applicants. I'm&nbsp;not saying it's OK to discriminate against Asian/Asian-American applicants, but rather that there's no obvious connection between that discrimination and a&nbsp;homogenous applicant pool. Increasing access and pool diversity can't help on its own, because the two thoughts are&nbsp;disconnected. Either the candidates are stupid&nbsp;(unlikely), or something else is going on.

Going with the latter: With the exception of Nader, the public intellectual history of the candidates demonstrates&nbsp;strong&nbsp;opposition to affirmative action/consideration of diversity in college admissions. I'll just give immediate and obvious&nbsp;evidence to that effect, in the interest of (dubious) brevity:
<ul>
	<li>Unz writes <a href="http://www.theamericanconservative.com/articles/the-myth-of-american-meritocracy/">in an article on The American Conservative:</a>
<blockquote>Conservatives have denounced “affirmative action” policies which emphasize race&nbsp;over academic merit, and thereby lead to the enrollment of lesser qualified&nbsp;blacks and Hispanics over their more qualified white and Asian competitors; they&nbsp;argue that our elite institutions should be color-blind and&nbsp;race-neutral. Meanwhile, liberals have countered that the student body of these&nbsp;institutions should “look like America,” at least approximately, and that ethnic&nbsp;and racial diversity intrinsically provide important educational benefits, at&nbsp;least if all admitted students are reasonably qualified and able to do the work.

My own position has always been strongly in the former camp, supporting&nbsp;meritocracy over diversity in elite admissions. But based on the detailed&nbsp;evidence I have discussed above, it appears that both these ideological values&nbsp;have gradually been overwhelmed and replaced by the influence of corruption and&nbsp;ethnic favoritism, thereby selecting future American elites which are not&nbsp;meritocratic nor diverse, neither being drawn from our most able students nor&nbsp;reasonably reflecting the general American population.</blockquote>
I could unpack that paragraph for days, but instead I'll&nbsp;just assert the obvious:&nbsp;Ron Unz&nbsp;doesn't like affirmative action. Which I refuse to scare quote even though he&nbsp;does.</li>
	<li>Lee Cheng <a href="https://www.utexas.edu/vp/irla/Documents/2013-10-11.Asian.Am.Legal.Fdn.80-20.Ntnl.Asian.Am.Edu.Fnd.pdf">filed a brief in Fisher v. UT Austin</a> supporting the challenge to the&nbsp;UT's system, arguing against taking race into account in admissions decision&nbsp;making in almost all cases.</li>
	<li>Stuart Taylor Jr. is the author of "<a href="http://www.amazon.com/Mismatch-Affirmative-Students-Intended-Universities/dp/0465029965">Mismatch: How&nbsp;Affirmative Action Hurts Students It's Intended to Help, and Why Universities&nbsp;Won't Admit It.</a>" Which is exactly what it sounds like.</li>
	<li>Stephen Hsu, who gets my non-sarcastic vote as&nbsp;the most reasonable of the non-Nader bunch, has argued&nbsp;repeatedly for "<a href="http://www.nytimes.com/roomfordebate/2012/02/22/beyond-race-in-affirmative-action/merit-not-race-in-college-admissions">Merit, not Race in College Admissions</a>". &nbsp;I tangent on merit&nbsp;below.</li>
</ul>
Regardless of the stated platform, evidence in the form of their actions and writings&nbsp;in other forums suggests that these candidates are strongly&nbsp;anti-affirmative action/admissions diversity consideration.&nbsp; Their calls for transparency in admissions are closely linked both intellectually and legally&nbsp;to&nbsp;their challenges to the use of race in admissions in this and other contexts. &nbsp;Although aspects of the current admissions process are legitimately&nbsp;problematic, swinging to the other extreme that these candidates have advocated in many&nbsp;other&nbsp;places is probably&nbsp;a bad move.

However, even if they truly only want transparency and are <em>not</em> setting out to end&nbsp;diversity considerations in admissions, or even if I <em>agreed</em> with that goal, I <em>still</em> wouldn't vote for them. Here's why: Unz in particular has strongly intimated&nbsp;that he seeks to&nbsp;to enact dramatic, destabilizing&nbsp;change from a position on the board. &nbsp;An&nbsp;overactive/radical board is <a href="http://www.nytimes.com/2012/09/16/magazine/teresa-sullivan-uva-ouster.html">basically the worst possible way to run&nbsp;a university</a>. &nbsp;In a stance that is admittedly influenced by my position&nbsp;as a faculty member at a major&nbsp;academic institution (and a UVA grad), I believe&nbsp;that shared governance, consensus&nbsp;building, and careful, nuanced &nbsp;reasoning by conscientious people is a much healthier way to enact change in the university environment than a few&nbsp;angry bros&nbsp;dictating from on high&nbsp;how Harvard should do anything. &nbsp;To be honest, I also don't mind grass-roots revolution; I'm just opposed to the "angry bros on high" model

<em>Executive summary:</em> the Free Harvard, Fair Harvard slate is advocating free&nbsp;admission and more transparency in Harvard admissions. Free admission is&nbsp;impossible and also stupid, and the "transparency" claim is very likely a&nbsp;smokescreen for vehemently anti-affirmative action/diversity agenda. Even if it's not (or even if it is and you think they're right), the&nbsp;slate is advocating for destabilizing change to come from the Overseers, which is no way to run a university. Thus, I advocate that you&nbsp;vote for someone else in the upcoming board election. &nbsp;Or, educate yourself and decide you disagree with me and vote for them anyway,&nbsp;but regardless: vote. &nbsp;And either way, don't be misled by Ralph Nader's presence on the ballot.

<em>A meritocratic aside:&nbsp;</em>"Meritocracy" makes my skin crawl because tl;dr&nbsp;Silicon Valley Dudebros. &nbsp;But skin crawlies is no basis for policy, so:&nbsp;Hsu advocates&nbsp;in the above-linked NYTimes article for a "strictly meritocratic"&nbsp;admissions model based strictly on GPA and SAT scores. &nbsp;On it's own, though, merit just means "the quality of being particularly good or worthy, especially so as&nbsp;to deserve praise or reward." (google define: merit). Why that means "grades&nbsp;and test scores and nothing else" eludes me. &nbsp;Admissions based on scores&nbsp;certainly is more objective than any "holistic"&nbsp;approach, but objectivity isn't intrinsically praiseworthy. &nbsp;Consider the following alternative admissions policy: admit all&nbsp;applicants&nbsp;above 5'10"; reject everyone else. This is very objective, but probably not the best way to admit a Harvard class. &nbsp;Similarly, test scores do provide a&nbsp;more objective metric than many other factors, but&nbsp;that doesn't make them more fair or a better way to assess merit than anything&nbsp;else. They just reward/are correlated with a different set of factors. For example, SAT scores are&nbsp;<a href="http://blogs.wsj.com/economics/2014/10/07/sat-scores-and-income-inequality-how-wealthier-kids-rank-higher/">strongly correlated with socioeconomic status</a>. As are grades, number of AP tests taken, ACT scores, etc&nbsp;(<a href="https://www.researchgate.net/publication/19658589_Adult_body_height_and_childhood_socioeconomic_group_in_Swedish_population">and height, </a>actually. &nbsp;And height<a href="http://www.apa.org/monitor/julaug04/standing.aspx"> is also strongly correlated with success</a>!&nbsp;So maybe they <em>should</em>&nbsp;only&nbsp;admit tall people?).

This is a deeply complicated issue that gets into what kinds of students Harvard&nbsp;should admit and how they should be evaluated, and what kinds of graduates Harvard wants to produce (Stephen Pinker <a href="https://newrepublic.com/article/119321/harvard-ivy-league-should-judge-students-standardized-tests">weighed in a couple of years ago</a>). But this is probably best left to another post. &nbsp;Suffice to say: discrimination is bad, but it's fallacious on face to equate merit with just scores. &nbsp;And also, neither the ENS model (which Hsu advocates)&nbsp;nor&nbsp;the resulting insane testing culture that dominates the French HS experience&nbsp;is necessarily to be aspired to.

**As usual, all opinions expressed here are my own and should not be considered representative of the opinions of my employer, spouse, neighborhood, family, dog, etc. &nbsp;Wish I could figure out how to put this at the bottom of every post automagically, but so it goes.